---
title: "National Blog Posting Month 2023: Day 1" 
date:   2023-11-01
categories: 
description: What is national blog posting month and how I'll be taking part this year.

---

For the third year running, I’m taking part in National Blog Posting Month (NaBloPoMo for short).

I’ll be publishing a new blog post every weekday throughout November.

## What is NaBloPoMo?

[According to this post by Michelle Weber](https://wordpress.com/blog/2014/10/24/the-namos-are-coming-the-namos-are-coming/), NaBloPoMo was started by an American blogger called Eden Kennedy, in response to National Novel Writing Month (NaNoWriMo).

Participants write a blog post every day throughout November, to break away from perfectionist ideals that might otherwise prevent them from sharing their work.

Since “Perfectionist ideals” is my middle name, so the scheme has always served as a good way for me to push through my writer’s block and put some new ideas out into the world.

## Where this year’s NaBloPoMo finds me

Having not learned from the last 2 years’ efforts, I have once again failed to get ahead with my writing, or even compile a list of topic ideas.

I’d actually go as far as to say that this year will be my most disorganised yet, but that’s OK.

I’ve gone through a series of big life changes this year, and so I’m interested to see how that shows up in my writing and - at the risk of sounding completely cheesy - to meet this new version of myself in the pages that ensue.

## What I’ll be writing about

Previous NaBloPoMo efforts have included a mixture of personal and work-related posts, and this year will be no exception.

Work wise, I’ll be sharing thoughts on design systems, content design, and perhaps a bit about my experience of working as a contractor - particularly in 2023 where I’ve experienced the longest client drought of my consulting career so far.

## Let’s begin.

Are you taking part in NaBloPoMo? I’d love to read your posts if you are.

Or, if there’s something you’d like me to write about, let me know—I need all the inspiration I can get.

Get in touch on: 

- [Twitter - or X (ugh)](https://twitter.com/Amy_Hupe) 
- [Mastodon](https://social.design.systems/@Amy_Hupe)
- [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/amy-hupe-61a3a368/) 
- [email at amy.l.hupe@gmail.com](mailto:amy.l.hupe@gmail.com)


